Introduction to Binary Tree – Data Structure and Algorithm Tutorials

A binary tree is a tree data structure in which each node can have at most two children, which are referred to as the left child and the right child. 

The topmost node in a binary tree is called the root, and the bottom-most nodes are called leaves. A binary tree can be visualized as a hierarchical structure with the root at the top and the leaves at the bottom.

Binary trees have many applications in computer science, including data storage and retrieval, expression evaluation, network routing, and game AI. They can also be used to implement various algorithms such as searching, sorting, and graph algorithms.

Representation of Binary Tree:
Each node in the tree contains the following:

Data
Pointer to the left child
Pointer to the right child
Binary Tree
Binary Tree

In C, we can represent a tree node using structures. In other languages, we can use classes as part of their OOP feature. Below is an example of a tree node with integer data.

// Class containing left and right child
// of current node and key value
class Node {
    int key;
    Node left, right;
 
    public Node(int item)
    {
        key = item;
        left = right = null;
    }
}


Basic Operations On Binary Tree:
Inserting an element.
Removing an element.
Searching for an element.
Deletion for an element.
Traversing an element. There are four (mainly three) types of traversals in a binary tree which will be discussed ahead.
Auxiliary Operations On Binary Tree:
Finding the height of the tree
Find the level of the tree
Finding the size of the entire tree.
Applications of Binary Tree:
In compilers, Expression Trees are used which is an application of binary trees.
Huffman coding trees are used in data compression algorithms.
Priority Queue is another application of binary tree that is used for searching maximum or minimum in O(1) time complexity.
Represent hierarchical data.
Used in editing software like Microsoft Excel and spreadsheets.
Useful for indexing segmented at the database is useful in storing cache in the system,
Syntax trees are used for most famous compilers for programming like GCC, and AOCL to perform arithmetic operations.
For implementing priority queues.
Used to find elements in less time (binary search tree)
Used to enable fast memory allocation in computers. 
Used to perform encoding and decoding operations.
Binary trees can be used to organize and retrieve information from large datasets, such as in inverted index and k-d trees.
Binary trees can be used to represent the decision-making process of computer-controlled characters in games, such as in decision trees.
Binary trees can be used to implement searching algorithms, such as in binary search trees which can be used to quickly find an element in a sorted list.
Binary trees can be used to implement sorting algorithms, such as in heap sort which uses a binary heap to sort elements efficiently.